one way to change our genes is to make
new ones as craig venter has so
elegantly shown another is to change our
lifestyles and what we're learning is
how powerful and dynamic these changes
can be that you don't have to wait very
long to see the benefits when you eat
healthier manage stress exercise and
love more your brain actually gets more
blood flow and more oxygen but more than
that your brain gets measurably bigger
things that were thought impossible just
a few years ago can actually be measured
now this was a figured out by Robin
Williams a few years before the rest of
us now there's some things that you can
do to make your brain grow new brain
cells some of my favorite things like
chocolate and tea blueberries alcohol
and moderation stress management and
cannabinoids found in marijuana I'm just
the messenger what what were we just
talking about
and other things that can make it worse
it can cause you to lose brain cells the
usual suspects like saturated fat and
sugar nicotine opiates cocaine too much
alcohol and chronic stress your skin
gets more blood flow when you change
your lifestyle so you age less quickly
your skin doesn't wrinkle as much your
heart gets more blood flow we've shown
that you can actually reverse heart
disease that these clogged arteries that
you see in the upper left after only a
year become measurably less clogged and
the cardiac PET scan shown in the lower
left the blue means no blood flow
a year later orange and white is maximal
blood flow we've shown you may be able
to stop a reverse the progression of
early prostate cancer by extension
breast cancer simply by making these
changes we found that tumor growth in
vitro was inhibited 70% in the group
that made these changes whereas only 9%
in the comparison group these
differences were highly significant even
your sexual organs get more blood flow
so you increase sexual potency one of
the most effective anti-smoking ads was
done by the Department of Health Service
is showing that nicotine which
constricts your arteries can cause a
heart attack or a stroke but it also
causes impotence half of guys who smoke
are impotent how sexy is that
and we're also about to publish the
study the first studies showing you can
change gene expression and men with
prostate cancer this is what's called a
heat map and the different colors and
along the side on the right are
different genes and we found that over
500 genes were favorably exchanged in
effect turning on the good genes the
disease preventing genes turning off the
disease promoting genes and so these
these findings I think are really very
powerful they're giving many people new
hope and new choices and companies like
Navigenics and DNA direct and 23andme
that are giving you your genetic
profiles are getting some people a sense
of gosh whoa what can I do about it
well our genes are not our fate and if
we make these changes they're a
predisposition but if we make bigger
changes than we might have made
otherwise we can actually change how our
genes are expressed thank you
you